_NOTE: This spec is currently being updated._

# Feedback guidelines

The goal of a language track on Exercism is to give people a way to achieve a
high level of [fluency](/docs/using/product/fluency) at a low level of proficiency. We're aiming for fluency
in the syntax, idioms, and the standard library of the language. Read
more about the [goal of Exercism here](https://github.com/exercism/docs/blob/master/about/goal-of-exercism.md).

## Definitions

In the following paragraphs, keywords such as **MUST**, **SHOULD**, **MAY**
are to be interpreted as in [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt);
given that we recognize the following four output states and their restrictions:

- `approve`: **MUST** be an approvable solution, **MAY** be with comment.
- `disapprove`: **MUST** be with comment
- `refer_to_mentor`: **MAY** be with comment

### Why is it not ... (e.g. **MUST**)?

Per [RFC2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt), if **MUST** is used, it is
a guarantee that the rule is always so, and does not need to be guarded for. For
example, **MUST** be without comment means that the website could crash if an
analyzer sends a comment anyway. **SHOULD** indicates any consumer of the output
must still guard against unwanted behavior.

### Approvability

A solution is approvable if it either matches the (set of) optimal solution(s)
of that exercise, or if it shows understanding of the teaching goals of that
exercise and every _core_ exercise that came before. This means that an
analyzer **MAY** approve a solution but still provide a set of comments as tips
relating to the exercise or further improvements.

### Idiomatic rules / Language features / Stylistic choices

In this document, **de facto** is defined as follows:

- **de facto**: describes practices that exist in reality, even if not
  officially recognized by laws.
- **de facto standard**: a custom or convention that has achieved a dominant
  position by public acceptance or market forces. Unofficial customs that are
  widely accepted.

In other words, if a nearly all developers (non-hobbyists) who write code in a
certain language have established certain rules, these rules are a **de facto
standard** and become idiomatic use. Example: **Ruby** uses 2 space indentation.

Some rules are language features, even if they are not documented well. These
language features are part of "idiomatic rules" and not stylistic choices.
Example: **Ruby**'s MRI treats variables named `_` differently.

Finally there are rules that are pure preferences, even though they might be
adopted by large bodies such as organizations and corporations. These rules
are usually part of _competing_ standards. Exercism does not favor one over
another. Example: **TypeScript** has a linter `tslint` (or `eslint` + plugin)
which is maintained by a company that is not Microsoft. It competes with other
linters such as `xo`. Most of the rules are not language features or idiomatic
rules, and therefore stylistic choices.

## Conditions and outcome

For feedback generated by automated mentoring:

- it **SHOULD** `disapprove` when someone isn't using one of the
  subjects the exercise is supposed to teach,
- each `disapprove` **MUST** have at least one comment,
- each `disapprove` **SHOULD** steer a student towards an `approve`,
- the analyzer **SHOULD** aim to teach a pathway, which means a student
  **SHOULD NOT** get a `refer_to_mentor` in a newer iteration, after a
  `disapprove`, given they follow that pathway.
- a `refer_to_mentor` **MAY** have one or more comments which will be given to
  the mentor,
- the same comment **MUST** not be added twice in one analysis. Adding the same
  comment with different parameters attached to it is not considered a duplicate.
- comments **SHOULD** be ordered by importance (the first comment being the most
  important, and the last comment being the least important).

It is currently undecided as to whether there is a minimum or maximum amount of
:speech_balloon: comments. However, each comment **SHOULD** be aiding the
student towards an approvable solution. Our recommendation is currently to aim
for one to three comments per iteration.

## Approvability

Given the above, and to re-iterate that we focus on language fluency:

### Incorrect Naming or Casing

In general, if it's a _language feature_ that will be caught by a compiler or
parser or based on official rules (which means there is a dependency on
correctness in tools), you should `disapprove`, preferably linking
to the official rules.

> - :-1: disapprove if there are official guidelines on naming conventions
> - :speech_balloon: leave a comment if there is something noteworthy
> - :no*bell: if its a \_stylistic* preference, **and** there are _competing
>   standards_, do not remark at all. Since there are competing standards,
>   they're all preferences.
> - :speech*balloon: if it's a \_stylistic* preference, **and** there is _one
>   clear standard_, comment on it. These rules enforce idiomatic code.
> - :question: If it's a _stylistic_ preference, **and** there is no clear
>   standard, but most to all non-hobbyist have adopted the same style, this
>   might be idiomatic. Comment at your discretion.

#### Examples

- **Ruby** has a language feature where `_` is treated differently,
  - :-1: if a student uses `_` for a variable name, but then uses it.
- **Ruby** recognizes `constants` only if they start with a **C**apital Letter,
  - :-1: if a student uses `snake_case` for a `class` name
- **Ruby** has _de facto_ standards on `cAsInG` and `name-ing`,
  - :speech_balloon: you **SHOULD** guide students that `snake_case` is to be
    expected by most IDEs and highlighting on exercism in code blocks.
- **JavaScript** IDEs highlight variables which are not used, except for those
  prefixed with an underscore (`_`).
  - :speech*balloon: note that this behavior exist so it might help them to use
    a different naming strategy. They might think that prefixing with `*`means `private`, which is not the case in JavaScript.
- **TypeScript** has a _de facto_ standard lint tool provided by Palantir,
  - :no_bell: If a student does not follow these rules as the lint tool is not
    official. In fact, there are multiple linters out there, with mutually
    exclusive rules.
- **Go** has very strict rules around naming and other linting.
  - :-1: if the student does not follow these (e.g. has not applied `golint`)
- **Go** has very strict rules around formatting.
  - :-1: if the student does not follow these (e.g. has not applied `gofmt`)

### Badly formatted code

The same rules apply as above. In general, if `linting` and a specific format is
not part of the official language, and/or not integral to the language:

- :no_bell: **SHOULD NOT** disapprove on it
- :speech_balloon: You **MAY** guide students towards tools for auto-formatting

# Running guidelines

Each solution gets 100% machine resources for a ten second window.

## Maximum runtime

After 10 seconds, the process is halted and reports as a time-out.
